Add blog "20 teams on SKIP: What we've learned along the way" (#44)
kartverket/skip.kartverket.no: blog/2024-07-26-20-teams-on-skip.md

your organization. Like everyone that starts with something new we've made
mistakes along the way, we've had to change course multiple times and most
importantly we've learned a lot in our journey.

On the occasion of this achievement we're going to look back at the decisions we
made that led us to building a successful platform. In this tech blog we are
showcasing the the secrets to our success - the decisions that have had the
biggest impact.

<!--truncate-->

## Principles matter

When you set out to create something new, you have the privilege of setting
some standards that encourage best practices. While this is possible to do for
an existing system, in practice it will mean a lot of work to get to the
point where you're able to enforce these standards. It's much easier to start
with a clean slate.

For our platform, we decided on a set of principles that we wanted to follow.
Some of these are:

- **Stateless**: Our clusters are stateless, which means that we can easily
  replace them if something goes wrong. All configuration is held in a GitOps
  repository and all state is held in external systems like managed databases,

>   object storage, etc. This significantly reduces operational complexity, as
>   means that when a cluster goes down we can easily replace or revert it by
>   applying the configuration from the GitOps repository without worrying about
>   losing state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
object storage, etc. This significantly reduces operational complexity, and 
  recovery time. If a cluster fails as we can easily replace or revert it by
  applying the configuration from the GitOps repository without worrying about
  losing state, or doing time-consuming data recovery operations.
```

"useful for Kartverket". This means that you can't work on your own pet project,
but it's vague enough that you can work on pretty much anything that you think
will be useful for the organization. 

Then, a week before the innovation day we will have a "pitching session", where
everyone who has an idea can pitch it to the rest of the team. This is a great
way to get feedback on your idea and to get others to join you in working on it.

Finally, we have a "show and tell" session at the end of the last day where
everyone shows what they've been working on. This way we can share our
experiences and discuss if this work can be improved and put into production.
We encourage everyone to show something, even if it's not finished or you did
video lessons, as this creates discussion and further ideas.

![Demo time!](img/show-and-tell.jpeg)

There's plenty of examples of features that are results of work done on these
days. On-premise Web Application Firewall with Wasm, Grafana features, open
source tools like [Skiperator](https://github.com/kartverket/skiperator) and
[Skyline](https://github.com/kartverket/skyline) as well as this very website!

> No one has time to prioritize innovation, and we're no different. But we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
No one has time to prioritize innovation. But we
```

Author: I'd like to keep this in there, as it emphasizes that we're the same as everyone else who have too much to do, but we choose to do it anyway

and secure solutions. This generally means using public cloud solutions like
Google Cloud Platform. But for most organizations, pushing this narrative incurs
significant friction and to some extent fear due to legal and cost concerns.
This is understandable, as the known is always more comfortable than the
unknown, and it's a view that's hard to change.

This is why it's important to take a long-term view on this. You're not going to
move everything to the cloud overnight, and you're not going to convince
everyone to get on board with this idea overnight. It's a long journey, and you
need to be patient and persistent. 

We've spent years pushing for the cloud, and we're still not there. You're going
to have to participate in many (*many!*) meetings, and you're going to have to
fight for every little thing over and over again. But it's necessary. Once 
everyone has a clear understanding of the risks and how to mitigate them, you
will be able to formulate a document guiding the organization's teams on how to
get to the cloud from a compliance point of view.

If you asked me for any recommendations on how to get to the cloud as easily as

> possible, it would be to first get leadership buy-in. This is the most important

Reviewer 2: Kanskje "leadership buy-in across the organization" er en bedre formulering? Selv med flere direktører på laget har det strandet hos oss.

competent platform team in place, you can start pushing for the cloud. Here you
need to talk directly with the legal team, not via other people. Have
representatives of the platform team sit down with the lawyers and talk through
the risks and how to mitigate them.  This is the only way you can combine the
technical and legal aspects of this work. Working in silos and not talking to
each other is a surefire way to fail.

## Autonomy and platform as a product

Your platform is a product, and so you need to work as a product team. This
means continuously improving your product, listening to your users, and building
the features that they need.

Research-based literature like "Team Topologies" establishes the importance of
autonomous teams in modern organizations. Traditional top-down organizations are
just not going to be able to have as close of a relationship with their
stakeholders as a team that is able to proactively understand the needs of their
users and make their own decisions that push continuous improvement of their
products. This is why it's important, even for infrastructure teams, to be able
to own their roadmap and make decisions on what to build when.

> Stakeholder management is key here. You need to be able to understand the needs

Reviewer 2: Jeg ville endret narrativet i dette avsnittet. Sånn jeg leser det nå høres det litt ut som "Siden vi allerede har vært ute og snakket med brukerne så må vi kunne si nei til ønsker, for vi har alt gjort resarch så vi vet hva dere trenger". Poenget er vel at med gode prosesser for behovskartlegging og god kontakt med interessenter så blir det også enklere å si hva som ikke bør prioriteres. Vri det fra "plattformteamet skal kunne si nei til forespørsler" til "plattformteamet gjør sine prioriteringer basert på behovene til alle interessentene".  My two cents :)

Author: Jeg kan prøve å skrive det om litt. Poenget er at det er viktig å kunne bruke autonomien sin til å utfordre om et ønske faktisk er nyttig for brukerene eller om det går mot sin hensikt. Hvis man sier ja til alt så får man ikke et godt produkt.

Author: Ny tekst:

> As a team you're obviously limited to the amount of resources you have and not
able to do everything, so understanding the needs of your stakeholders and
prioritizing them is essential. You need to do research to know the needs of
your users; sometimes requests don't align well with the actual needs. Just
because someone asks loudly for something, doesn't mean it's the right fit for
your platform. Saying yes to everything does not result in a good product. Dare
to challenge assumptions and ask why.
